# RL | 2025-01-18

## Proof: DP algorithm

For any admissible $\pi = \{ \mu_0, \mu_1, \dots, \mu_{N-1} \}$, let $\pi^k = \{ \mu_k, \mu_{k+1}, \dots, \mu_{N-1} \}, \ k = 0, 1, \dots, N-1$. [$\pi^k \to \text{`pi sup k'}$]. Let

$$
\underbrace{ \large J_k^*(x_k) }_{\begin{split}\text{Optimal cost for the } \\ (N-k) \text{ stage subproblem}\end{split}} = \min_{\pi^k} \operatorname{\large E} \left[ g_N(X_N) + \sum_{i=k}^{N-1} g_i(X_i, \mu_i(X_i), X_{i+1}) \Bigg| X_k = x_k \right]
$$

Let $J_N^*(x_N) = g_N(x_n) = J_N(x_N), \ \forall \ x_N \in S$

We will show by ~mathematical induction that $J_k^*(x_k) = J_k(x_k), \ \forall \ x_k \in S, \ \forall \ k \geq 0$

Assume that for some $k$ and all $x_{k+1}$,

$$
J_{k+1}^*(x_{k+1}) = J_{k+1}(x_{k+1})
$$

Note that $\pi^k = \{ \mu_k, \pi^{k+1} \}$. Thus, for all $x_k$,

$$
\small
\begin{aligned}
J_k^*(x_k)
& =
\min_{\{ \mu_k, \pi^{k+1} \}} \operatorname{E}_{X_{k+1}, \dots, X_N} \left[ \left. g_N(X_N) + g_k(X_k, \mu_k(X_k), X_{k+1}) + \sum_{i=k+1}^{N-1} g_i(X_i, \mu_i(X_i), X_{i+1}) \right| X_k = x_k \right]
\\ & =
\min_{\{ \mu_k, \pi^{k+1} \}} \operatorname{E}_{X_{k+1}} \left[ \left. g_k(X_k, \mu_k(X_k), X_{k+1}) + \operatorname{E}_{X_{k+2}, \dots, X_N} \left[ \left. g_N(X_N) + \sum_{i=k+1}^{N-1} g_i(X_i, \mu_i(X_i), X_{i+1}) \right| X_{k+1} \right] \right| X_k = x_k \right]
\\ & =
\min_{\mu_k} \operatorname{E}_{X_{k+1}} \left[ \left. g_k(X_k, \mu_k(X_k), X_{k+1}) + \underbrace{ \left( \min_{\pi^{k+1}} \operatorname{E}_{X_{k+2}, \dots, X_N} \left[ \left. g_N(X_N) + \sum_{i=k+1}^{N-1} g_i(X_i, \mu_i(X_i), X_{i+1}) \right|  X_{k+1} \right] \right) }_{= \ J_{k+1}^*(x_{k+1}) \ \ = \ J_{k+1}(x_{k+1}) \ \ \text{ by induction hypothesis}} \right| X_k = x_k  \right]
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus,

$$
J_k^*(x_k) = \min_{\mu_k} \operatorname{E}_{X_{k+1}} \Big[ g_k(X_k, \mu_k(X_k), X_{k+1}) + J_{k+1}^*(x_{k+1}) \Big| X_k = x_k  \Big]
$$

## Example: Chess match between player and opponent

**Aim:** Formulate an optimal control strategy for player.

A player can select

- Timid play (never wins)
  - Draws with probability $p_d$
  - Looses with probability $1 - p_d$
- Bold play (never draws)
  - Wins with probability $p_w$
  - Looses with probability $1 - p_w$

Score assignment

- Win $\to$ $1$ point
- Loss $\to$ $0$ point
- Draw $\to$ $1/2$ point

~ After $N$ games, if the score is tied, the match would go into what is called 'sudden death mode' where in the first to win a match wins the tournament.

State: $\text{Net score} = \text{Points of player} - \text{Points of opponent}$

Immediate rewards: $\to$ No immediate rewards

$$
r_k(x_k, a_k, x_{k+1}) = 0, \quad \forall \ k = 0, 1, \dots, N-1
$$

Only $r_N(x_N) = J_N(x_N) \to$ Terminal reward

**Note:** This is a maximisation problem.

To convert to a minimisation problem, interchange the costs and rewards.

Optimal reward-to-go at $k^{\text{th}}$ stage,

$$
J_k(x_k) = \max \Big\{ p_d \ J_{k+1}(x_k) + (1 - p_d) \ J_{k+1}(x_k - 1), \quad p_w \ J_{k+1}(x_k) + (1 - p_w) \ J_{k+1}(x_k - 1) \Big\}
$$

Here,

$$
J_N(x_N) =
\begin{cases}
1 & \text{if } x_N > 0 \\
p_w & \text{if } x_N = 0 \\
0 & \text{if } x_N < 0
\end{cases}
$$

We'll assume that $p_d > p_w$, else it's too simple/ ~trivial/ obvious/ there is no problem to solve.

### For $k = N-1$

$$
J_{N-1}(x_{N-1}) = \max \Big\{ p_d \ J_N(x_{N-1}) + (1 - p_d) \ J_N(x_{N-1} - 1), \quad p_w \ J_N(x_{N-1} + 1) + (1 - p_w) \ J_N(x_{N-1} - 1) \Big\}
$$

#### Case-1: $x_{N-1} > 1$

$$
J_{N-1}(x_{N-1}) = \max \Big\{ p_d + (1 - p_d), \quad p_w + (1 - p_w) \Big\} = 1
$$

$\implies$ Either timid play or bold play is optimal

#### Case-2: $x_{N-1} = 1$

$$
J_{N-1}(1) = \max \Big\{ p_d + (1 - p_d) p_w, \quad p_w + (1 - p_w) p_w \Big\} = p_d + (1 - p_d) p_w
$$

$\implies$ Timid play is optimal

#### Case-3: $x_{N-1} = 0$

$$
J_{N-1}(0) = \max \Big\{ p_d \ J_N(0) + (1 - p_d) \ J_N(-1), \quad p_w \ J_N(0) + (1 - p_w) \ J_N(-1) \Big\} = \max \big\{ p_d \ p_w, \ p_w \big\} = p_w
$$

$\implies$ Bold strategy is optimal

#### Case-4: $x_{N-1} = -1$

$$
J_{N-1}(-1) = \max \Big\{ \overbrace{ p_d \ J_N(-1) + (1 - p_d) \ J_N(-2) }^{= \ 0}, \quad p_w \ \underbrace{ J_N(0) }_{= \ p_w} + \underbrace{ (1 - p_w) \ J_N(-2) }_{= \ 0} \Big\} = p_w^2
$$

$\implies$ Bold strategy is optimal

#### Case-5: $x_{N-1} < -1$

Can check that either strategy is optimal.

~ More of like a friendly match; not competing at play;

### Case: 2 games remaining and scores are tied

$$
\begin{aligned}
J_{N-2}(0)
& =
\max \Big\{ p_d \ J_{N-1}(0) + (1 - p_d) \ J_{N-1}(-1), \quad p_w \ J_{N-1}(1) + (1 - p_w) \ J_{N-1}(-1) \Big\}
\\ & =
\max \Big\{ p_d \ p_w + (1 - p_d) \ p_w^2, \ \quad p_w \big( p_d + (1 - p_d) \ p_w \big) + (1 - p_w) \ p_w^2 \Big\} = p_w \big( p_w + (p_w + p_d) (1 - p_w) \big)
\end{aligned}
$$

$\implies$ Bold strategy is optimal

## Example: Control of a queue

~ Network queue, Routing queue, stand in line queue, etc.

Assume buffer size is $n$.

---

